>
> "Yeah, I am going to build a constraint solver"
>
>  --some fool
>

Let's have a little explanation for day 8 (part 2).

The puzzle is interesting because it is a nice little problem in
constraint solving. I did not look at how others solved it, so maybe
there is a nice trick to do it easily, I don't know, I wanted to
indulge in over-engineering.

# A very quick intro to Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP)

A CSP is usually represented by a triple of sets, `(V,D,C)`, where `V`
is a set of variables, `D` a set of domains associated with the
variables, and `C` a set of *constraints* expressing relationships
between variables.

Each constraint is associated with a filtering procedure that tries to
reduce the domains of its variables, until their domain shrink and can
only represent one value (we say the variable is **instantiated** with
a value), or until it becomes empty (in which case there is no
solution).

For example, a small CSP can be:

- a variable `A` whose initial domain is the interval `0..10`
- a variable `B` whose initial domain is the interval `5..15`
- A constraint `A > B`

The filtering procedure associated with `>` looks at the respective
domains of its left and right terms, and can derive a "smaller"
problem that has the exact same solutions as the original: here, we
know that `A` is greater than `B`, so `A` cannot be e.g. 3, because
that would mean `B` is at most 2, a value outside its domain.
Likewise, if `B` is e.g. 13, there is no value for `A` in its domain
that works. The original CSP can be simplified as:

- variable `A` with `dom(A)` being `[6, 10]`
- variable `B` with `dom(B)` being `[5, 9]`

During constraint solving, A CSP undergoes a series of filtering to
reduce the size of the problem, without reducing the set of solutions:
we generally want constraints to conserve all solutions.

Once a CSP is filtered, there might remain constraints and domains
which represent more than one solutions. At this point, the
*constraint solver* procedes by trial-and-error: it assumes a variable
is constrained in one way or another (e.g. let's say A is equal to 6),
and applies the filtering step again, to see if that reaches a
solution or a failure.

When a failure occurs, the solver backtracks and tries another branch,
until it explores all the states. The role of constraint filtering is
to reduce the search space to allow a solver to find solutions that
otherwise would require too much exploration.

This is a very general overview of constraint programming but I hope
this will help for the next part.

# Modeling the puzzle

## Segment variables and domains

               a
              ---
           b |   | c
              -d-
           e |   | f
              ---
               g

The original, working display has 7 segments named `a` to `g`, in
lowercase. Lowercase letters represents here distinct, concrete
values.

The buggy display also has 7 segments, and we associate one variable
to each of those segments. The variables are named with uppercase
letters, from `A` to `G`.

We want to associate each variable with a unique segment, using the
constraints from our puzzle input. Initially, all puzzles start with
the same state, and variables `A` to `G` can map to all segments `a`
to `g`, so we say that the domains are as follows:

     dom(A) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(B) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(C) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(D) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(E) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(F) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}
     dom(G) = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}

However, instead of manipulating lists of segments, it is sufficient
to use a byte; it is also convenient when doing intersections of
domains, because we can use bitwise operations on domains. We note
`#bxxx` the binary representation of a number, so initially the domain
is:

     dom(A) = #b1111111
     dom(B) = #b1111111
     dom(C) = #b1111111
     dom(D) = #b1111111
     dom(E) = #b1111111
     dom(F) = #b1111111
     dom(G) = #b1111111

Note that we associate the bit at position 0 with `a`, bit 1 with `b`,
etc. so segments are visually ordered from right to left.

Moreover, we don't need to use named variables, since there is a fixed
set of variables we can use an array of 7 bytes to represent the
domains of all our variables. That's why in the code the initial
domain is an array of 7 times 127:

    [127, 127, 127, 127, 127, 127, 127]
      A    B    C    D    E    F    G
      0    1    2    3    4    5    7

All variables are exclusive, there is an `all-different` constraint
tying them.

## Words to segment domain

When reading a 2-letter word `"bc"`, we know the word represents the
digit 1, because it is the only one that has two segments (as
explained in the puzzle).

The original segment display uses segments `c` and `f` to display that
digit. So in our CSP the variables `B` and `C` are bound to the domain
`{c,f}`.

                     gfedcba
                     |||||||
      segment "c":   0000100
      segment "f":   0100000
      ----------------------
       "c" or "f":   0100100 

We can thus set the domain of `B` and `C` to byte `#b0100100`, it
represents the set of original segments both may represent.

Moreover, in that case, we know that **all** variables **except** `B`
and `C` **cannot** be bound to either `"c"` or `"f"`: if that was the
case, one of `B` or `C` could not be instantiated to a valid value.

This can be see with the two words `"ab"` and `"dab"` in some random
input line. The first one is necessarily representing digit 1, the
other digit 7. The domains are:

                                   gfedcba
                                   |||||||
    "ab"  => digit 1:  A,B   are #b0100100 [c,f]
    "dab" => digit 7:  A,B,D are #b0100101 [a,c,f]

               a
              ###
           b |   # c
              -d-
           e |   # f
              ---
               g

Necessarily, variable `D` must be the top segment of digit 7, namely
segment `"a"`, otherwise variables `A` and `B` cannot be instantiated.
When introducing the constraint for `"ab`", a mask `#b1011011` is
applied to all other domains to restrict other variables. That's how
filtering ensures that the domain of `D` is reduced to segment `"a"`.

## Ambiguous words

When encountering a digit that is ambiguous, like strings of size 5,
there might be different mappings from variables to segments. For
example, an input digit `"fecdb"` can represent the digits 5, 3 or 2,
because they all have 5 segments, and all the variables `F`, `E`, `C`,
`D` and `B` for this digit are associated with either `#b1101011`,
`#b1101101` or `#b1011101`, the associated segment domains for 5, 3 or
2.

We have thus the following constraint:

    (all-vars-match-one-of (list F E C D B)
                           (list (digit-byte 5)
                                 (digit-byte 3)
                                 (digit-byte 2)))

I can't find efficient propagation rules for this, except trying to
check if any variable is incompatible with any domain to reduce the
number of domains, but this does not work much. Instead, in practice
this is where the solver split the search space is as many
sub-problems as there are domains.

# Implementation

## Waking up constraints

Each constraint is associated with a filtering function, but also a
set of variables that it depends on. When a variable is constrained or
instanciated, and only then, we can try to filter the constraint.

...
